[THEME MUSIC]
>>GREGG BRADEN: Hello,
my name's Gregg Braden.
I'd like to welcome you to
this very special presentation
of "The Divine Matrix"--
Bridging time and space,
miracles and belief.
In the last episode,
we discovered
that almost universally,
ancient texts and traditions,
they've told us that
everything and everyone is
connected to this mysterious
web or net of energy.
In this episode,
we'll explore what
the largest and most
complex machine ever built
has discovered about the
fractions of a second
immediately after the Big Bang.
I think the experiments
are fascinating,
but what's even more fascinating
is the scientific thinking
that had to change to reflect
what the experiments have
shown.
Here's what I mean.
There was a tremendous
spiritual revolution
that was sweeping the
Earth in the late 1800s,
and it included the
scientific community.
Very well-known
scientists were influenced
by this revolution
and the thinking
that there is a field of energy
that underlies our existence.
At that time it was
called the ether.
It influenced scientists like
Nikola Tesla, Rudolf Steiner,
Royal Rife, Walter
Russell, even John Keeley.
So the idea that
this field exists
was the foundation
of the philosophy
of these brilliant
men, and it's also
the idea that allowed their
revolutionary inventions
to work in the
way that they did.
It's what made
everything possible.
For example, Tesla had the idea
of developing a form of power
that could be shared but not
confined to wires and cables.
It was called broadcast power.
So it works much the way a
television station broadcasts
information.
It is created in a studio, or in
a laboratory, in Tesla's case.
The information would
be sent into the field,
and it would be received
by receivers that knew how
to tune into that information.
Well, that technology
is only possible
if the information is
moving through stuff,
through something, and that's
what this ether, this field,
was all about.
The healing technologies of
Royal Rife and Wilhelm Reich
work using energy that was
directed toward the body,
didn't physically
touch the body.
And for that healing
to be successful,
it, as well, had to move through
some medium, some conduit, that
allowed the information to
get from the healing device
into the body.
John Keely's perpetual energy
machine is the same thing.
It's true.
But the idea of the ether,
it's been around even long
before the 1800s.
In the 1600s, the father
of science, Isaac Newton,
he described a field of energy
that he called the ether
and he used that word to
describe the substance that he
believed filled the
universe and was
even responsible for
gravity and the sensations
in the human body.
The 19th century scientist,
James Clerk Maxwell,
the father of
electromagnetic theory,
he believed that this
ether field exists
and I want to share--
in his exact words,
I want to share a quote.
He said that "a
material substance
of a more subtle kind,
supposed to exist
in those parts of space
which are apparently empty,"
end of quote.
In 1902, the Nobel Prize
winner Hendrik Lorentz
developed the equations
that gave Einstein
the tools to develop his
theory of relativity.
Lorentz's equations believed
that the ether field exists
and he said, this
is a quote as well.
"I cannot but regard the
ether, which can be the seat
of an electromagnetic field with
its energy and its vibrations,
however different it may be
from all ordinary matter,"
end of quote.
Einstein?
He believed in this
field, as well.
But he's described it in a
very, very different way.
He said simply space without
ether is unthinkable.
So the point that I'm
making with all of this
is the sense in the
scientific community
that there's something
out there that fills what
we think of as empty space.
It has been accepted for a very,
very long time until recently.
It's unacceptable today,
and I'll tell you,
if you want to clear a
roomful of scientists
at a scientific conference,
begin your presentation
by saying, today I'm going to
talk about the ether field.
And you'll see them get
up and leave the room.
The term is not even used
today, although the field itself
is now being validated.
Well, in 1887, physicist Albert
Michelson and chemist Edward
Morley, they attempted for the
first time to describe once
and for all if this mysterious
field actually exists.
This is the very famous
Michelson Morley experiment
that I mentioned in
the last episode.
It was performed in the
basement of Case Western Reserve
University in Ohio
in the United States,
in a very nondescript building
where they built a device that
is called an interferometer.
Now, the image that you're
seeing on your screen
is the interferometer, and I'd
like to take just a few moments
and explain to you what
it is that they were doing
and what it is that this
experiment revealed.
So on the left hand
side of the screen,
you're seeing a source of light.
The light is being
emitted, it's moving
to the right toward a
mirror on the right hand
side of your screen.
However, to go to that mirror,
before it can get there it
must pass through
another partial mirror.
It is called a half
silvered mirror,
that allows some of the light to
continue to the right and some
of it to be reflected
to another mirror
at the top of the screen.
So the one beam is
being split into two.
Now here's the thinking.
Michelson and Morley
proposed that there
is a field of energy
that surrounds us,
it permeates the universe.
It is everywhere all the
time, and they believed
that the field is in motion.
They believed it's moving.
And so their thinking was that
when they shoot a beam of light
through this field,
if the beam parallels
the movement of the field,
it's going to move quicker
and it will be unimpeded.
If the beam is
perpendicular and it
has to move through
this field, it's
going to be slowed
down just a little bit.
And when that beam is reunited
with the original beam,
it will create an
interference pattern.
So let's go back to the image
so I can share with you what
I mean by this.
So we're seeing the beam.
It's coming from the left,
going through the splitter.
One of the beams is going
straight, one of the beams
is going to the top.
Both are being reflected
back to the central mirror,
and that reunited beam is
now going to a detector.
In the detector,
the scientists are
looking for signs of
the interference pattern
that I just mentioned.
In the experiments, they
found no interference pattern.
Now, in a very, very
simple way of thinking
about this experiment,
if you and I
were to go outside from whatever
building we're in right now,
and we have a piece
of tissue paper.
And we held that tissue paper
in our hand, and in the moment
we held the tissue, there
was no movement in the paper.
And if we assume because
the paper is not moving,
that means there is no wind,
and if we assume because there
is no wind that no air exists.
Of course, we know
that that's not true.
The air exists whether
the wind is moving or not.
But this is the equivalent of
what Michelson and Morley, what
they believed this
experiment was showing them.
Because they saw no
interference pattern,
they said, we detect no
movement in the field.
Therefore, the field
must not exist.
So in 1887, the
scientific papers
that were published in
peer reviewed journals
and the information was
accepted by scientists
from all over the world stated
that there is no field that
underlies our physical reality.
That ether field does not exist.
And from this time in
1887, all of our science
has been based upon that
belief of separation,
that everything is separate
from everything else.
What happens in Point A
has no influence on what's
happening in Point B.
Now our science has done
OK without this deeper
understanding of
our connectivity.
It's obviously allowed
us to send space probes
to other planets, and allowed
us to send people to the moon.
It's allowed us to
take our science only
to a certain place.
But now, science has
reached the plateau
and in order to move
further, in order
to unify the theories of quantum
physics and classical physics,
for example, in order to explain
the phenomena that are being
seen on the quantum
level, in order
to explain the
phenomenon that we're
seeing on the other
side of the universe
relative to where
we are now, science
must accept a deeper connection.
And it's for that reason, 1986.
1986, the Michelson-Morley
experiment was repeated.
It was repeated under the
auspices of the United States
Air Force.
Same experiment, they have
much better equipment.
And you'll never
guess what they found?
The field exists.
The 1986 experiment
demonstrated that the field
that can no longer be
called the ether, it exists.
And it exists precisely
within the parameters
that Michelson and Morley had
predicted 99 years earlier.
But this experiment,
in my opinion,
should have made the
headlines in major newspapers
and scientific journals
throughout the world.
Instead, it was relegated to a
relatively small article, again
in a very prestigious
journal, Nature.
It was performed by a
man named Silvertooth
under a very, very
benign title, simply
called Special Relativity.
It was published in the
journal "Nature," Volume 322
in August of 1986.
So if you'd like to check
this out for yourself,
you can go and see
what the article says.
What happened was when
Silvertooth replicated
the Michelson-Morley experiment,
he found that interference
pattern.
And what you're seeing
on your screen right now
is an image showing the light
without the interference
pattern on the left, and
with the interference
pattern on the right.
So you can actually see what
this interference pattern
is all about.
So version two of
Michelson and Morley
provided the first scientific
evidence for this field.
But it's also raised
a lot of questions.
New questions.
Now that we know this
field is out there,
scientists can stop asking
themselves, is it there
and begin answering
the deeper questions.
What does it made of?
How does it work?
How do we relate to this field?
What does it mean in
our everyday lives?
Well, the attempt to
answer these questions
has led to the largest
research project ever conceived
in 5,000 years of human history.
It has led to the greatest
level of scientific cooperation,
global cooperation,
using the largest
and the single most complex and
sophisticated device ever built
by humankind.
Of course, I'm talking
about the CERN,
superconducting super collider.
CERN is the European
Organization
for Nuclear Research.
And I know there's
a lot of information
out there in different
circles about CERN, what
it is, what it does, what
it means, who's using it.
I'd just like to address
briefly some of those things
and share with you how
these CERN experiments work
and what they have
recently discovered
with regard to the field
that we're now talking about.
So let's begin
with what is CERN.
It is the world's largest
superconducting super collider.
It is the largest
co-operative science project
the world has ever known.
It uses the largest and most
complex devices ever built.
It began in 1953,
and it's currently
maintained today by 22 nations
maintain the CERN laboratory
itself.
It hosts research from
over 12,000 scientists
from 600 universities that
represent over 70 countries.
And I want to be really
clear about this.
The research is for
university-backed projects
only.
So I'm saying that
because I've had
people ask me can any scientist
working from his basement
go over to CERN and
do an experiment
that has dangerous
implications for the world?
And the answer is no.
These are
university-backed projects.
So the point that
I'm making here
is CERN itself does
not do experiments.
CERN maintains the
laboratories that
are then made available to
universities and research
institutions under the
auspices of the universities
so that those
experiments can be done.
So what is the fundamental
purpose of CERN?
The purpose is to solve
the fundamental mysteries
of the universe,
and in doing so,
answer the deep questions
such as what is it
that fills the empty space?
CERN is trying to
determine what happened
in the first fractions of
fractions of seconds right
after the Big Bang, after
the instant of creation,
to determine what is
matter actually made of?
What is the field that
we're talking about made of?
I had the opportunity to
visit CERN myself in 2017.
And I want to share with you
a little bit of my experience
and what I discovered.
It is an amazing place.
And I think that we are not
really hearing about some
of the very, very
powerful discoveries that
are being made there and
what they really mean to us.
So let me just describe
the laboratory itself.
The laboratory is actually
made of multiple laboratories.
It is made of six particle
accelerators, one particle
decelerator.
So six laboratories where
they are accelerating quantum
particles at very
high rates of speed,
and one where they slow it down.
All right?
It's actually so
big, the laboratory
is so big that it overlaps
two to different countries.
It overlaps France
and Switzerland.
So when I was
visiting, we actually
had to cross an international
border to get from a laboratory
to the cafeteria, for example,
or from the library to where
some of the experiments are.
The device itself,
the devices, they
are located about 150 meters
under the surface of the Earth.
And what you're
seeing on your screen
is a schematic diagram of
how these laboratories work.
What you're seeing
are the circles,
these are the accelerators where
particles are accelerated just
under the speed
of light and then
allowed to collide in
very specific locations
so those collisions
can be monitored.
But before the particles
can reach those speeds,
they go through other
particle accelerators.
So you're seeing in
the bottom your screen,
there's a red oval, and
there's a smaller red oval.
And there are blue
lines, then, that
represent where these
particles are being directed
from the smaller ovals,
where the particles are being
prepared for the
experiment and accelerated
to certain rates of speed.
And they follow
the blue lines up
into the larger and the larger,
the larger accelerators where
you see those larger circles.
So bottom line of
what's happening here
is that inside of the
particle accelerators,
there are two tubes.
And in one tube, quantum
particles, generally protons,
are accelerated in one
direction until they reach just
under the speed of light.
And in the second tube,
another set of particles
are being accelerated in
the opposite direction
until they reach just
under the speed of light.
And there is a very
specific point, then,
where these particles
are allowed,
they're directed to come
together and collide
with one another.
This is the particle collision
that we're talking about.
And when that happens,
the quantum particles
are destroyed in
and of themselves
and broken into fragments
of their constituents.
And these fragments,
these smaller particles
create very specific traces,
very specific patterns that
can be mapped.
And they have characteristic
qualities that scientists know.
So what you're seeing
on the screen right now
is a typical map from
the resulting collision
of quantum particles.
And each of those
paths that you see
is tracing a path,
and the quality
and the characteristic of
an even smaller constituent
of the particles.
So in this way,
these scientists are
beginning to understand the
elementary particles, the stuff
that goes into making up
the matter as we know it
in the world today.
I've spent a lot of
my adult life studying
ancient and
indigenous traditions.
And although, as I've said,
they're not always science,
a lot of those traditions
give us tremendous insight
into what science is
revealing in our world today.
In the Hindu traditions, for
example, the creation deity--
actually, three deities,
Brahma, the creator, Vishnu,
the maintainer, and Shiva.
And Shiva is typically
described as the destroyer,
although if you go into the
Hindu traditions themselves,
Shiva is not so much
about the destroyer.
Shiva is the transformer
or the regenerator,
so the particle
must be destroyed
before it can be transformed or
regenerated into something new.
So it's not the
destruction in the sense
that everything is just gone.
What was once
present is destroyed
to reveal something deeper.
I'm sharing this with you
because at the CERN facility,
the country of India donated
the image you're seeing
on your screen right now.
This is the image of Shiva, the
transformer, the regenerator,
to symbolize what it is
that's happening at the CERN
superconducting super
colliding laboratories.
And I think this is
fascinating that we see this.
So the question,
what is it that's
actually being transformed,
as Shiva is saying,
or regenerated?
Well, I'm going to
talk about the field.
Before I do that,
we're going to talk
just a little bit about
some really basic physics
and where we are in
the world right now.
When I was in school back in
the 1950s, 1960s, early '70s,
I was taught that the atom
looks like what you're
seeing on the screen right now.
And it was things
moving around the thing,
particles called electrons that
are moving around the nucleus.
And this is the model that
has gotten science so far.
However, it is
also the model that
is breaking down because we
now know that the atom doesn't
look like this.
The atom is not things
moving around things.
And this model of the electron,
the proton, and the neutron,
as well as it served
us, technically
we know it is no longer true.
The atom is made of fields
of energy, pulsing, vibrating
fields of energy that are
concentrated in some places
more than others.
But this new model, this
vibratory model of the atom,
has given way to the
particles and the subparticles
now that are so complex and
so numerous they're actually
called the particle zoo.
Remember, when you and I
were in school, probably
we thought that
physics was complex
when we talked about the atom
being electrons, protons,
neutrons, and all the
things that go with that.
Well, the particle zoo now
has gone far beyond electrons,
protons, and neutrons.
They're telling us now
the new standard model,
that all matter is made
of leptons, bosons,
and what are called hadrons.
Under the category
of leptons, this
is where we find our
familiar electron as well
as other particles.
Under the category of bosons
is where we now find photons.
And under the
category of hadrons
is where we now find things like
the protons and the neutrons,
as well as quarks and
a lot of other things.
This is a very, very
different physics
that has unfolded as a result
of what has been discovered
at CERN and other
laboratories as we
look into these
fundamental particles.
Now all this is going
somewhere because everything
that we're learning
about this physics
must be occurring within
the conduit of stuff.
There's something out
there that is allowing
all these interactions
to happen,
and this is where we're
going with this whole thing
right now.
So when we look at what is
now called the standard model
of physics--you're seeing
it on your screen--
what you see is that there are
some particles that are related
to matter, some particles
are related to force,
and some are theoretical,
such as the Higgs particle.
And you're seeing
it in a gray box.
It's got a circle around it.
The Higgs particle-- if the
standard model is accurate,
if it works the way we
think it really works--
then we should be able to
find, under certain conditions,
this Higgs particle.
And if that particle
is there, it's
going to open the door
to even deeper questions,
but it's going to give us a lot
of answers at the same time.
The question that the
physicists are asking,
is there an ultimate particle?
And we've gone from the atom,
as we used to think of it, now
to this particle zoo.
Is there an ultimate particle?
Is there what is
called a god particle?
This is the term some physicists
are actually using now.
Is there a god particle that
is the fundamental particle
for all things?
Well, I'm going to
come back to CERN now.
CERN is recreating the Big
Bang to answer this question.
It's not so much
about the Big Bang
itself, that primal
release of energy.
It's what happened just
fractions of fractions
of fractions of a second
after that release happened.
As the universe began to expand,
something began to change.
And certain particles that were
created in that release did
things that cannot be
accounted for right now.
Some of the particles
slowed down.
Some of them continued
moving at the same speed.
And scientists are saying why?
Why would some particles
slow and some particles
continue at the same speed?
Why would some
particles begin to have
mass and other
particles not have mass?
Well the current theory
is this, that there
is an unrecognized
field of energy that was
responsible for those changes.
And that field has been known
as the Higgs field in honor
of the creator of the theory is
a physicist named Peter Higgs,
who's still with us today.
On July 4 of the year
2012, scientists at CERN
made an announcement
that absolutely rocked
the scientific community.
They announced that through
one of the CERN experiments,
they had discovered
a new particle,
and it was in the mass
region precisely where
that Higgs particle
was predicted
to be by the standard model.
They'd never seen it before.
So they said if the
standard model is working,
and we collide these
particles, and they
break down into their
elementary constituent particles
in the area of a certain energy
level, we should see something.
That energy level is
126 giga electron volts.
They'd never looked
there before.
And when they made this
discovery, lo and behold,
there was a particle with
precisely those characteristics
precisely where they
predicted it was.
It is now called the Higgs
Boson, the Higgs particle.
So the properties
of this Higgs Boson
are precisely
consistent from where
Peter Higgs had predicted.
Well, this is
important, and this
is where it gets really,
really interesting
because for the
Higgs Boson to exist,
there must be a Higgs field
that it is emerging from.
The Higgs field is
the elusive field
that we're going to be talking
about throughout this program.
The Higgs field has
now been validated.
The Higgs field is believed to
be the field that scientists
have been searching
for three centuries
now, since the time of
Isaac Newton, the ether that
fills the empty space.
It's now accepted that this
Higgs field is the field that
exists everywhere all the time.
It's what gives
particles their mass.
So at the time of the Big Bang,
just after that primal release
of energy when those
particles were created
and they began to
expand, it is moving
because they're moving
through the Higgs field,
that some of the particles
interacted with the field
in a way that slowed them
down and gave them mass
while others continued
to move at the speed
that they were originally.
In the scientific world, this
is a blockbuster discovery.
This is a landmark discovery
because this field that
has been questioned,
the speculation has
been does it exist, is it
there, we now know that it is.
And it's given many names.
Some people simply call
this the Higgs field.
Some people call it the field.
Some are calling it the source.
Some are calling it the
matrix, as Max Planck.
Some are calling this
the divine matrix.
And for the rest
of this program,
just to make it easy
for our conversation,
I'm going to use either
the term the matrix
or the divine matrix to
describe the field that we're
talking about now.
So the question is, now we
know that the field is there,
this matrix is there,
what does it do?
How does it work?
Well, this field fulfills
three fundamental principles
that make your life
possible, my life possible,
and the world as we
know it possible.
Number one, the field is the
container for all things.
All things that we
know, all things that
exist in the universe
are happening
within the confines of this
field of the Divine Matrix.
Number two, it is the
bridge between our inner
and our outer world.
It is the bridge that explains
how our thoughts, feelings,
emotions, our prayers can
be created from within us
but find the people
and the places
that are the object
of our prayers,
whether in another room or
halfway around the world.
That's the bridge.
And number three, this
field is the mirror.
It's a quantum
mirror in our world
for what we truly believe in
our mind and in our heart,
and what we create
in our imagination.
So when we ask the
question now, who are we,
our answer must incorporate
our relationship to this field,
to the divine matrix.
I've spent much of my
adult life exploring
many of the ancient indigenous
traditions of our past.
And my exploration
has taken me into some
of the most magnificent
and beautiful
and remote and
isolated and pristine
places remaining in the world
today, such as the monasteries
of Tibet that were very
available to me in the 1990s
as I was taking groups
into these places.
And it was in one
of these monasteries
that I had the
opportunity to meet
with the elder, the
abbot of the monastery.
And it was while I was writing
the book titled "The Divine
Matrix".
And I asked this abbot, from
his perspective as a Buddhist
scientist, as a Buddhist
scholar, I asked him,
what is the stuff that fills
the field of everything?
What is the stuff that holds
this universe together?
What is the force
that allows everything
to be as it is in
the world today?
Well, my Tibetan is terrible,
so I was speaking to him
through a translator.
And he and the translator
launched into a conversation
without me, back
and forth, bantering
because of the
uncertainty that he
had in terms of
my knowledge level
and how they answered
the question.
And suddenly the
translator looked at me
and answered my question
with a single word,
and the word was compassion.
So the answer to
my question, what
is the stuff that fills
the universe, what
is the stuff that holds
everything together,
the abbot had just answered
me with the word compassion.
And I looked back at him and
I said, is compassion a force
that fills the universe?
Is it the stuff that
holds everything together?
Or is compassion an experience
that we have within our bodies?
And once again, the
translator and the abbot
had their conversation
back and forth.
And then they looked at me with
a single word for the answer.
And the answer was simply
yes, that compassion
is both a force that
fills the universe
and holds this world together,
and it is an experience
that we create
within our bodies.
Now I'm sharing this with you
because on the cold, damp floor
of a monastery at almost
16,000 feet above sea
level on the Tibetan Plateau,
this beautiful, powerful,
brilliant Buddhist man had
just shared with me one
of the deepest secrets of the
human experience, that we have
within us the ability to
interact with the force that
fills the empty space
of the universe.
And that interaction
and that force
is the focus of their
lifetime of study.
So when I asked him about
the role of compassion
in our lives, what
he was saying to me
is that because this field
is a mirror for everything
that we create within us, we
create compassion in the world
by becoming compassion
in our lives.
The field is reflecting
what it is that we become.
In other words, we must
become in our lives
the things that we
choose to experience
in the world around us.
So the rules that
govern Planck's field
are the rules that govern the
Higgs field, the rules that
govern this field that the
abbot is describing for me.
Those rules tell us why the
abbot was absolutely correct
when he said to me that we
must become in our lives
the things that we choose
to experience in the world.
Both the discovery
of the Higgs field
and the wisdom of the
Tibetan abbot tell us
that not only are we connected
through a field of energy,
but we are the field.
We are the matrix.
And it's because
we're the matrix
that the discoveries
that describe it
are describing us as
well, our possibilities,
our capabilities, our potential.
Well, in the next
episode, we'll discover
the rules that define
the matrix that
underlies our everyday reality.
So I want to thank you
for joining me today.
Be sure to tune in for our next
all new episode of "The Divine
Matrix" Bridging tme,
space, miracles, and belief.
[THEME MUSIC]